Welcome back everyone to part three of the stock market analysis data capstone project Let's hop over
back to the Jupiter note book and continue with the final part.
All right so if scroll down to the notebook where it says Part three basic financial analysis so really
going to focus here on a few key financial calculations that we'll be using throughout the rest of the
course and this is mainly going to serve as a transition to the second half of the course.
We've learned about the different libraries.
Now it's time to actually dive in to some key financial calculations.
So the first thing we're going to talk about is daily percent change.
So daily percent change.
Otherwise known as returns daily returns that is defined by this following formula.
We have our teeth that is the return at time t is equal to the price at time t divided by the price
at time T minus one and then minus one from that.
Result.
So what this basically informs you of is YOUR percent gain or loss.
So if you bought the stock on day number one and then sold it on day number two that is the very next
day and then divided the difference and then subtract that one you'd essentially get your percent gain
or percent loss.
So you can imagine that if you have a very stable stock that is the price.
Day to Day doesn't change that much.
Then your volatility is low and your return tends to be close to zero.
So you can imagine that a stock that never changes price such as price that they want was 100 price
they too was 100 price on day three was 100 the most stable it could ever be.
That means that this return is going to be zero because you'd have a hundred divided by a hundred would
be one and then one minus one is zero.
So your daily return would be zero if you had a completely flat line stable stock.
You can imagine though if your price fluctuates wildly then this value is going to get larger whether
it's a large negative number or a large positive number depending on whether you're gaining or losing.
So if you were to plot this out with a histogram and you had a really wide distribution that is the
x axis went really low and really high then your stock is more volatile from one day to the next.
If you have a very narrow distribution that is centered in close around zero that means you have a relatively
stable stock.
So the more volatile the stock is the higher risk it is.
But also the higher reward and the narrower it is that means the more stable it is and the lower risk
and lower award a possibility.
OK.
So we're going to create a new column for each data frame called the returns column and this column
is going to be calculated from the close price column and there's two ways to do this.
One is a simple calculation using the shift method that follows this formula right here.
Or you can use the bandas built or excuse me panderers built 10 percent change method.
So we'll show you how to do both right now.
Let's start off by actually converting this formula right here into pand this code.
So the first thing going to do is actually create.
We'll start off for Tesla will say Tesla returns and I'm going to set that equal to me zoom in one more
level here.
I'm going to set that equal to the closing price that is my price at time t.
So I'll say Tesla close.
And then when I'm going to do is divide it by Tesla clothes and then I'm going to shift it over one
Ford and then I'm going to take that whole thing and then divide it or excuse me subtract one from it.
So somebody that may confuse people is the shift forward one you may think that because says Price at
time T minus one they would shift negative one.
But let me actually show you why we shift forward 1 instead of minus one.
If I ask for the clothes column right here the series I get the price of January 3rd is $28 if I actually
shift this over one then I get $28 over here on January 4th which if you think about what January 4th
originally looked like if we look at this January 4th was originally twenty seven point seven with its
previous day price that is price at T-minus 1 equal to 28.
So the shift of 4 to 1 basically shifts all the prices forward one so that the index still stays the
same but the price is now reflective of what we wanted.
Price at T minus 1 which is why we used shift 1 here.
So that's the actual calculation using the formula itself.
Now fortunately there is a percent change or PCTs underscore change method built into pantless that
essentially does this for you.
And if you kind of master off tutorials online you may have seen this already.
So we're going to say Tesler returns is equal to Tesla.
And I will say the closing price thought PCTs underscore change and you can do shift tab here to read
more about it.
But basically it's exactly what we're trying to calculate the percent change over a given number of
periods so our periods in our case is just one time period or one day.
So that's all we have to do.
And that's going to return the exact same results so if we take a look at the returns it's the exact
same result here as if you had done it with this method so willing to take a look at my number here
I'll say 59 I will skip running this one and then take a look at returns again and you'll see it's the
exact same result.
So you can either use PCTs underscore change or rate here this shift position.
So they're both the exact same thing probably percent change a little easier to use.
So that's what we're going to do for the other two stocks.
You can see here we have to return.
So that's the percent change.
So if you're losing money it's going to be negative if you're gaining money it's going to be positive.
And in general there are going to be small movements because we're doing day to day.
So now let's copy and paste this and fill in for forward and GM and then also want to change the score
here GM and change this one to Ford.
OK so now we have all the returns for are they different.
So if we take a look at just one of these data frames for example the head of Ford is here the open
high low close volume total traded and then returns with the first one being a null value.
All right so now we're going to do is plot a histogram of each of the companies returns that returns
column and you can either do them separately or stack them on top of each other.
We'll show you how to do both.
And then the question is which stock is the most volatile and you're going to judge the volatility by
the variance or how wide the distribution is when you actually do the histogram.
And later on we'll actually do a kernel density estimation plot to kind of visualize that distribution
aspect a little more.
So as far as the actual histograms go it's essentially really easy of pandas hopefully remember that
all you have to do is say Ford returns that hissed and that's essentially it.
Now there's there's not that many bands here.
So if you take a look at the length of our actual data frame So for example the length of Ford returns
it's over 1000 data points in here.
By default.
I believe it's like 10 bins.
So we probably want to increase the size so we'll say bins is 10 by default.
I'm going to increase this lusciously tenfold to 100.
And know we can get a better idea of this distribution so you can kind of see a lot of it centered around
zero and it goes up to a minimum of like negative point 0 8 and up to maximum around point 0 8.
So we're going to repeat this for the other stocks.
Say GM and here we see General Motors and General Motors tends to be again centered at zero which makes
sense.
Pretty much every stocks me since around zero.
They're stable to some degree and we can see negative wise minimum round point 0 6 and then Max.
There's a couple of key days here.
Four or five days where I had a big gain then finally we'll do Tesla Tesla returns here.
And let's say bin's equal to 100.
Now Tesla what's interesting to note here is that the X-axis actually goes much wider than the other
two.
So Tesla can actually go up to around negative point to and beyond positive point to.
Now that's a total different scale than what we saw here.
So what would be nice is if we actually stacked these histograms on top of each other to really see
that closely.
So that's exactly we're going to do now we're going to say Tesla returns his one 100.
And let's not give this a label of Tesla and then we'll give it a larger size because we're at three
on top of each other we'll say 10 com 8s and then we're going to copy and paste this and instead of
Tesla we'll have General Motors and we'll have Ford here and let's fix these labels as well.
This will be GM
This will be Ford and then we're going to do is just say Pulte a legend so he can see the legend.
Right.
And here's our history stacked on top of each other.
And it's quick Now usually when you're stuck on top of each other you want to introduce some sort of
alpha so you can see through them a little bit.
So that's exactly what we do now.
We will add an alpha to these we'll see Alpha and it's really up to you what values you do.
You can kind of play around with it.
Well just put 0.4 0.5 for all of them round this again.
Now we can kind of see them stacked on top of each other a little more clearly.
Let me zoom in one level out.
So now this visualization we actually get a lot of information about the general volatility on a day
to day basis.
We can see that General Motors and Ford tend to be more stable and it looks like Ford tends to be a
little more stable and can see has these two really high peaks very close to zero.
Now Tesla is kind of a totally different animal here.
It's has quite a bit more volatility because you can see that it has a much larger or much wider distribution
here versus General Motors and Ford are kind of basically stacked right on top of each other.
And if you scroll back up and check out some of the other plots we did that's also reflective in the
other plots so when you plot of them all out here for instance on this plot let's make this figures
a little bigger here let's say Tovah 8.
We can see here that Tesla has a lot more volatility versus General Motors and Ford pretty flat in comparison.
Now if he zoomed in on General Motors and Ford You can see that they do have their own volatility.
When you focus in on just one of their stocks in comparison to Tesla it's really not even close.
And if you read anything about financial news regarding Tesla anyon Musk you kind of already knew that.
So we're going to scroll all the way back down to part 3.
And we created our histograms are looking good.
We have stacked histogram and now we're also going to do is try putting a kernel density estimation
plot to get another viewpoint.
So do that.
We're going to say Tesla returns the plot kind the sequel to the kernel that's estimation will give
him the label of Tesla and let's make the fix size really whatever we want say 10 by eight that is going
to just copy and paste this two more times and will do the same thing for General Motors.
And Ford and then we also want to make sure that those labels are changed as well.
Let's say Ford General Motors thing called the legend Kilty Luchon.
And when we run this we should see the kernel density estimation plots and here the actual distributions
come a lot more clear.
You can see Ford clearly peaking much more stable than any of the stocks really.
It's way more stable and Tesla a little more stable than General Motors So Ford with the highest peak
centered around Sury can see a lot of the daily returns tend to be the same.
It's a relatively flat stock in comparison to something like Tesla and Tesla You can see here it's a
little wider meaning a little more volatility and it goes kind of all the way to the ends here.
All right.
The next thing we're asked was to also try creating some box plots for comparing the returns.
Now when you're using Box plots with pandas you actually need all the columns in the same data frame.
So you'll start off by doing the same box if you zoom in that one more level here box the physical to
PD the concatenate.
And we're going to concatenate the three columns together.
The returns will concatenate Teslas returns will concatenate forward returns.
And then we'll concatenate General Motor returns
and then we'll need to set the access equal to one here.
And then let's also set the column names will say POCs the columns is equal to Tesla.
I'll say it just right for returns.
Then next on up was Ford returns.
And then finally we have General Motors returns
and now we're ready to actually do the box plot off of this or say box the F plot I'll specify that
kind is equal to box.
And if we just do this we should see this little box play here.
The sizing isn't so great.
So let's actually change that we'll say think size equal to the eight 11 now we get this figure here
so we can see here again.
Clearly Tesla returns quite a bit more of a wide distribution a lot more outliers.
And then we can see Ford and General Motors relatively similar maybe Ford's a little more stable which
is kind of telling the same story that we saw appear before it being the highest peak on the Katy plot.
All right.
So just different ways you can analyze volatility just based off the daily returns.
So now we're going to compare the return between the stocks so we already did it one way but now we're
going to directly plot them against each other.
So in order to do this we're going to just simply create a scatter matrix plot to see the correlation
between the daily returns.
So all we need to do is say scatter matrix remember we already imported it earlier from the panel's
plotting and we'll say box the f. we'll call whip's fig size equal to something reasonable like eight
by eight also set an alpha here because we have lots of points.
And then as we did before we can set up histogram keywords arguments as a dictionary and let's just
make the bins something like 100 bins or something like that.
See what your bins.
And we should get a little looks.
Make sure that you actually have it here on and property just needs to be in s there k d s.
There we go and let's actually get a semi-colon so we don't see that large array output right.
So we can see here as far as daily returns.
Very similar behavior to the actual prices.
Ford and General Motors tend to be correlated together.
And then Tesla not so much between the other two.
All right.
So it looks like Ford and GM do have some sort of possible relationship.
So we're going to plot these two just these two against each other to view that more closely.
So let's actually create that scatterplot will say box the F that plot kind to scatter all say X is
well let's make sure we actually write the column names correctly.
I believe it's called name here.
Ford and GM right.
So we're going to copy those and bring them down here.
So I'll say x is equal to the column.
Ford returns and Y is equal to the column.
General Motors returns.
Let's give this a little bit of an alpha 0.5 and let's give this nice fix size let's say eight by so
many that I can see the scatterplot of the General Motors returns and the Ford returns and we can see
here you're maybe thinking this is almost like a linear regression task where you can just draw a line
and have some sort of linear relationship that is for returns get higher General Motor returns tend
to go higher.
And it's for returns go negative General Motors returns tend to go negative.
And this is one of the very first things we're gonna discover as we begin to do basic algorithmic trading.
Finding two stocks that tend to be correlated to each other and a classic example something like Coca-Cola
and Pepsi.
But we can see here there's clearly some sort of relationship between these two car companies versus
If we plot this against Tesla we didn't really see that sort of relationship OK.
The very last topic we'll discuss is cumulative daily returns instances a little bit of a wider topic.
We're going to leave it to Part 4 of the solutions.
So we'll end part three here just kind of tackling these elite returns.
Coming up next we'll talk about cumulative daily returns.
Thanks and I'll see you at the next lecture.